gradle: add setup hook (#272380)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/languages-frameworks/gradle.section.md

# Gradle {#gradle}

Gradle is a popular build tool for Java/Kotlin. Unfortunately, despites
its ubiquity, it has many poor design decisions. Because Gradle itself

> doesn't offer reproduced builds in any meaningful way, nixpkgs has a

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
doesn't offer reproducible builds in any meaningful way, nixpkgs has a
```

man-in-the-middle-proxy designed for intercepting Gradle web requests.

## Building a Gradle package {#building-a-gradle-package}

A simple case is when the package doesn't have any dependencies. In that
case, simply adding `gradle` to `nativeBuildInputs` may be enough:

```nix
stdenv.mkDerivation {
  pname = "jextract";
  version = "unstable-2023-11-27";

  src = fetchFromGitHub {
    owner = "openjdk";
    repo = "jextract";
    rev = "8730fcf05c229d035b0db52ee6bd82622e9d03e9";
    hash = "sha256-Wct/yx5C0EjDtDyXNYDH5LRmrfq7islXbPVIGBR6x5Y=";
  };

  nativeBuildInputs = [
    gradle
    makeWrapper
  ];

  gradleFlags = [
    "-Pllvm_home=${llvmPackages.libclang.lib}"
    "-Pjdk21_home=${jdk21}"
  ];

  doCheck = true;

  gradleCheckTask = "verify";

  installPhase = ''
    runHook preInstall

    mkdir -p $out/opt/
    cp -r ./build/jextract $out/opt/jextract

    runHook postInstall
  '';

  postFixup = ''

>     makeWrapper "$out/opt/jextract/bin/jextract" "$out/bin/jextract"

Reviewer 2: If people would ask if opt if prefered over share, what would we tell them?

Reviewer 3: For the purpose of documentation, you could just make it an obvious placeholder like `$out/path/to/jextract`.

Author: i did just that

  '';

  meta = with lib; {
    description = "A tool which mechanically generates Java bindings from a native library headers";
    homepage = "https://github.com/openjdk/jextract";
    license = licenses.gpl2Only;
    maintainers = with maintainers; [ sharzy ];
  };
}
```

However, most of the time the package does have dependencies. In that
case, you will have to use the man-in-the-middle proxy.

First, add a dependencies update script:

```nix
passthru.updateDeps = gradle.updateDeps { inherit pname; };
```

> Then, build the update script via `nix-build -A <pname>.updateDeps` and
> run it via `./result`. It will generate `deps.json` in your package
> directory. You can then import it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then run the update script like `$(nix-build -A <pname>.updateDeps).
It will generate `deps.json` in your package directory. You can then import it:
```

> ```gradle

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```nix
```

mitmCache = gradle.fetchDeps {
  inherit pname;
  data = ./deps.json;
};
```

## Update Script {#gradle-update-script}

The update script flow:

- Run the derivation's unpack, patch and configure phases
- Copy the result to the Nix store, alongside the Gradle flags (if set)
  and `preBuild`
- Copy it from the Nix store to an `nsjail` sandbox with networking
  enabled
- Run `preBuild` in the nsjail sandbox
- Run the `preBuild` that was passed as an argument to `updateDeps`
- Run `gradleCommands`, which defaults to `gradle nixDownloadDeps`
- Run the `postBuild` that was passed as an argument to `updateDeps`

`updateDeps` takes the following arguments:

- `attrPath` - a way to get to the package attr in nixpkgs, usually this
  is the package name
- `pname` - an alias for `attrPath`, for convenience. This should only
  be used when `attrPath` matches `pname`
- `code` - allows you to completely override the Nix code used to
  evaluate the package (only relevant for downstream, non-nixpkgs
  projects)
- `attrOverrides` - allows you to override certain attributes of the

>   derivation that will be used for copying the source from

Reviewer 2: I would expect that override allows me to overwrite certain aspects and overrideAttrs everything.

Author: this is attrOverrides, not overrideAttrs

Author: closing because this is removed now

- `preBuild` / `postBuild` - run these commands before/after fetching
  dependencies
- `gradleCommands` - run these commands to fetch the dependencies
- `depsPath` - path to the dependencies lockfile relative to the
  package. Defaults to `deps.json`.
- `availablePackages` - packages that will be available in the nsjail
  sandbox. By default, no extra packages will be available, which is
  enough for nearly all packages. For example, the MITM proxy supports
  intercepting `curl` and `wget` traffic, so if the Gradle build script
  requires them, you may add them here.

## Environment {#gradle-environment}

The Gradle setup hook accepts the following environment variables:

- `mitmCache` - the MITM proxy cache imported using `gradle.fetchDeps`
- `mitmCachePort` - the MITM proxy port to be used (defaults to 1337)

> - `gradleFlags` - command-line flags to be used for every Gradle

Reviewer 2: Typical environment variables in linux would look like MITM_CACHE, MITM_CACHE_PORT or GRADLE_FLAGS.

I think you mean that those are not interpolated via nix code, right?

Author: These are environment variables, i.e. you can set it in a `mkDerivation` call

# Gradle {#gradle}

> Gradle is a popular build tool for Java/Kotlin. Unfortunately, despites

Author: ```suggestion
Gradle is a popular build tool for Java/Kotlin. Unfortunately, despite
```

Will apply later, don't want to push too much, it will spam Github with 31 commits

Reviewer 3: You could also just push those as regular commits and simply squash them later

Author: you're right

# Gradle {#gradle}

Gradle is a popular build tool for Java/Kotlin. Unfortunately, despite
its ubiquity, it has many poor design decisions. Because Gradle itself
doesn't offer reproducible builds in any meaningful way, nixpkgs has a

> man-in-the-middle-proxy designed for intercepting Gradle web requests.

Author: absolutely, that's a much better way to go about it

# Gradle {#gradle}

Gradle is a popular build tool for Java/Kotlin. Gradle itself doesn't
currently provide tools to make dependency resolution reproducible, so
nixpkgs has a proxy designed for intercepting Gradle web requests to
record dependencies so they can be restored in a reproducible fashion.

## Building a Gradle package {#building-a-gradle-package}

Here's how a typical derivation will look like:

```nix

> stdenv.mkDerivation (finalAttrs: {

Reviewer 5: [`finalAttrs` are not used anymore](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/326677#discussion_r1677222295), please adjust this

Reviewer 5: Oh my bad

}; in self
```

This is useful if you can't easily pass the derivation as its own
argument, or if your `mkDerivation` is responsible for building multiple
packages.

In the former case, the update script will stay the same even if the
derivation is called with different arguments. In the latter case, the
update script will change depending on the derivation arguments. It's up
to you to decide which one would work best for your derivation.

## Update Script {#gradle-update-script}

The update script flow:

- Build the derivation's source via `pkgs.srcOnly`
- Enter a `nix-shell` for the derivation in a `bwrap` sandbox (the
  sandbox is only used on Linux)
- Set the `IN_GRADLE_UPDATE_DEPS` environment variable to `1`
- Run the derivation's `unpackPhase`, `patchPhase`, `configurePhase`
- Run the derivation's `gradleUpdateScript` (the Gradle setup hook sets
  a default value for it, which runs `preBuild`, `preGradleUpdate`
  hooks, fetches the dependencies using `gradleUpdateTask`, and finally
  runs the `postGradleUpdate` hook)
- Finally, store all of the fetched files' hashes in the lockfile. They
  may be `.jar`/`.pom` files from Maven repositories, or they may be

>   files otherwise used for building the package.

Reviewer 3: It's unclear that this describes the internal operation of the update script; it reads like this is something users would have to do themselves.

Author: changed from "the update script flow" to "the update script does the following"

  downstream, non-nixpkgs projects)
- `depsPath` - path to the dependencies lockfile (can be relative to the
  package, can be absolute). Defaults to `"deps.json"`. The use of this
  attribute is discouraged for nixpkgs, consider creating subdirectories
  if your package requires multiple `deps.json` files.

## Environment {#gradle-environment}

The Gradle setup hook accepts the following environment variables:

- `mitmCache` - the MITM proxy cache imported using `gradle.fetchDeps`
- `gradleFlags` - command-line flags to be used for every Gradle
  invocation (this simply registers a function that uses the necessary
  flags).
  - You can't use `gradleFlags` for flags that contain spaces, in that
    case you must add `gradleFlagsArray+=("-flag with spaces")` to the
    derivation's bash code instead.
- `gradleBuildTask` - the Gradle task to be used for building the
  package. Defaults to `assemble`.
- `gradleCheckTask` - the Gradle task to be used for checking the
  package if `doCheck` is set to `true`. Defaults to `test`.
- `gradleUpdateTask` - the Gradle task to be used for fetching all of
  the package's dependencies in `gradle.updateDeps`. Defaults to

>   `nixDownloadDeps`.

Reviewer 3: You could mention here that these support being space-delimited and can therefore be set as a list and also that they need to be escaped if they contain magic shell characters.

Author: I reworded it to "task (or tasks)"

currently provide tools to make dependency resolution reproducible, so
nixpkgs has a proxy designed for intercepting Gradle web requests to
record dependencies so they can be restored in a reproducible fashion.

## Building a Gradle package {#building-a-gradle-package}

A simple case is when the package doesn't have any dependencies. In that
case, simply adding `gradle` to `nativeBuildInputs` may be enough:

```nix
stdenv.mkDerivation {
  pname = "jextract";
  version = "unstable-2023-11-27";

  src = fetchFromGitHub {
    owner = "openjdk";
    repo = "jextract";
    rev = "8730fcf05c229d035b0db52ee6bd82622e9d03e9";
    hash = "sha256-Wct/yx5C0EjDtDyXNYDH5LRmrfq7islXbPVIGBR6x5Y=";
  };

  nativeBuildInputs = [
    gradle
    makeWrapper
  ];

  gradleFlags = [
    "-Pllvm_home=${llvmPackages.libclang.lib}"
    "-Pjdk21_home=${jdk21}"
  ];

  doCheck = true;

  gradleCheckTask = "verify";

  installPhase = ''
    runHook preInstall

    mkdir -p $out/path/to/jextract
    cp -r ./build/jextract/* $out/path/to/jextract/

    runHook postInstall
  '';

  postFixup = ''
    makeWrapper "$out/path/to/jextract/bin/jextract" "$out/bin/jextract"
  '';
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: This is the first and only complete-looking example anyone attempting to use gradle will see and use as a reference.

It does a bunch of non-standard stuff on the one hand (llvm home?) and yet doesn't do many things I'd consider common (mitmCache, passthru.updateDeps, gradleBuildTask, makeWrapper to wrap a jar).

I think it'd be better to have a rather complete example of all the things you may need to do first and foremost and leave the uncommon event of a package with no dependencies for an advanced example (or just a comment really).

You might be surprised but after not having worked with this PR for a week or so and attempting to use the docs as a guide, this has proven to be a rather significant roadblock.

Author: `makeWrapper` to wrap a jar is reasonable to add here, yes.

I don't think making the example have dependencies is that good of an idea because the next two paragraphs are important for understanding how to create and update deps.json. I think I could add additional emphasis on the fact the package doesn't have any dependencies.

Author: now that I simplified it by merging `fetchDeps` and `updateDeps`, this seems reasonable, I've done just that
